London commuters will be able to collect short stories to read from vending machines

London commuters are going to be able to collect short stories to read from vending machines in a UK first.

Short stories, ranging from one, to three, to five-minutes long, will now be able from Canary Wharf at the touch of a button.

The vending machines are already popular for travellers in France, Hong Kong and the US, but the east London station will be the first in the country to offer the service.

Each story will be free for commuters to take, with an option of choosing the length of the story. They can read new instalments of the story each day they travel.

Made by French company Short Edition, the new short story vending machines will feature a broad range of genres, including sci-fi romance and children’s fiction.

Work by writers such as Virgina Woolf, Lewis Carroll and Charles Dickens will all be made available.

The three machines are set to be launched in Canary Wharf on Thursday and machines will feature a specially commissioned one-minute tale from English novelist Anthony Horowitz.

The author said: “I’ve always loved the challenge of the short story - creating a whole world in just a few pages.

“So I was very happy to write Mr Robinson for Canary Wharf’s brilliant new Short Story Stations. Here’s a whodunnit, complete with suspects and clues, that can be started and finished in just a minute.

“I hope it will entertain tube travellers who will know, at least, that they won’t have the frustration of having to get off before the end!”

Lucie Moore, Head of Arts and Events, Canary Wharf Group added: “We’re all guilty of saying we’re too busy, but our research found that a staggering 70 per cent of us would rather get lost in a good book than get lost down the rabbit hole of social media.

“Our Short Story Stations provide the perfect digital antidote - a return to analogue scrolling. We hope Anthony’s brilliant new work helps people to fall back in love with short stories.”
